---
layout: post-no-feature
title: "Hiphopathy - Introduction "
description: "One of most pressing questions for my generation to answer is that of
maximizing participation. In my field of computer science (CS), there is
a near absence of women and underrepresented ethnic-minorities (African
Americans, Hispanics, Native Americans, Pacific Islanders and persons
with disabilities)."
comments: true
category: articles
--- 




The Challenge
-------------

One fateful day 1952, Stanford Law graduated 112 students, of which 5
were women. One of these five would later rise to become the first
female Supreme Court Justice of the United States. Sandra Day O’Connor,
graduated third in her Stanford law class, excited about her future in
law, only to have her hopes dashed as she could not secure a job! Only
one position opened itself to her, that of a *Legal Secretary*
(Harper, 2012). It was so rare for women to graduate from law school
that society hadn’t caught up to that fact. And yet, today, law has
overcome these hurdles.

One of most pressing questions for my generation to answer is that of
maximizing participation. In my field of computer science (CS), there is
a near absence of women and underrepresented ethnic-minorities (African
Americans, Hispanics, Native Americans, Pacific Islanders and persons
with disabilities) (Trauth et al., 2012; Gurer and Camp, 2002; Zweben, 2010; NSF, 2013).
This statement should be alarming to anyone, because it means that
nearly 70% of the American workforce is not fully engaged in the
technology sector. The civil rights leader, the Reverend Jesse Jackson,
has in recent years postulated that this lack of gender and ethnic
representation is the new frontline of the civil rights movement
(Hardy, 2014; Jackson, 2014). Whether one agrees with that rhetoric
or not, what is conclusive is that maximizing participation in
technology can no longer remain a background issue.

From the outside looking in, one may be easily swayed to believe that
what computer science suffers from is the twin evils of sexism and
racism. However, a closer examination into the numbers reveals something
far more complex. CS suffers from the compounding effect of four
separate challenges:

1.  A lack of presence of CS in K-12 education.

2.  The under-production of post-secondary degrees in CS.

3.  The underrepresentation of women in CS.

4.  The underrepresentation of ethnic-minorities in CS.

In August 2008, the College Board–the body that designs and administers
standardized test and curricula for K-12 education–announced the
elimination of the CS Advanced Placement (AP) AB examination, the
equivalent of a full year of computer science at the college level
(Astrachan et al., 2009). This announcement would prove to
be the necessary precipitate that would catalyze the conversation around
the decline of computer science at secondary and post-secondary
institutions, since its hey day in the 1980s.

In 2011, around 20,000 students took the AP CS exam, of which 19% were
female. From figure [APStem]({{ site.url }}/images/hiphopathy/APExams.png), you can see in comparison, over 300,000
students took the calculus exam, of which 47% were female—figure
[apcs~gender]({{ site.url }}/images/hiphopathy/APExamsGender.png). To make these figures more concrete, this means that in
2011, less than **3%** of the almost one million high school students
taking AP Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) exams
participated in AP CS.

Longitudinal data collected by the College Board reveals that APCS exam
participation has consistently hovered around 20,000 since 1997. Over
the long run, the College Board determined that it was no longer
financially feasible for it to administer the exam, and it was
eliminated for reasons of severe under-enrollment. This low
participation in AP CS is most important because research has shown that
students who take AP CS are eight times more likely to pick CS as their
major (Mattern et al., 2011).

![High School Advanced Placement Exams, 2011.]({{ site.url }}/images/hiphopathy/APExams.png)

![High School Advanced Placement Exams by Gender, 2011.]({{ site.url }}/images/hiphopathy/APExamsGender.png)

One of the major challenges with maximizing participation in computer
science is that CS has not generally been one of the canonical high
school classes. What makes this fact important is that if a student is
not related to someone who already works in the technology field, there
is a high chance that they will not know it exists as a potential career
path. Unlike other professions like law, medicine, or even certain kinds
of engineering, computer science as a field and university major is
relatively new. If one is to use the founding of professional
organizations as a rough proxy for the formal recognition of fields, we
can easily see that CS is a mere toddler. The American Medical
Association (AMA), the premiere learned society for medicine was founded
in 1847, 168 years ago. The American Bar Association (ABA), the premiere
learned society for law was founded in 1878, 137 years ago. While the
Association of Computing Machinery (ACM), the premiere learned society
for computing was founded in 1947 (Alt, 1972), only 68
years ago!

Not withstanding the low participation of computer science in K-12
environments, one could argue that the same goes for law, medicine and
engineering. Most high schools do not have an “Introduction to Law”
class, neither do they have an “Intro to Medicine class” and so on. And
yet students go on to university and seek those majors out. So the lack
of presence in K-12 cannot be the full story.

If one holds true to the maxim that *you need to see it, to be it*, then
perhaps we can look to media to fill this gap for early computer science
exposure. However, unlike medicine or law, which has a plethora of main
stream media shows, unfortunately, the same thing cannot be said of
computer science. This fact is important because research has shown that
the media plays a role in helping young people discover potential career
paths. To quote Kitzinger, *et al.*,

> “Role model theory suggests that representations of women in SET[^1]
> may be important in showing young people that women can develop
> successful careers in science, engineering and technology.
> Experimental and survey research shows that the media ‘exert a
> demonstrable impact on children’s occupational knowledge and role
> identification’ and that previous experience with (or information
> about) a successful woman in a traditional male occupation decreases
> gender bias in evaluation and selection decisions made by both student
> and professional judges. ” (Kitzinger et al., 2008)

This lack of positive computer science primers from the media, further
isolates youth from exposure to computer science as a desirable field.
With this knowledge, one has to update the challenges that computer
science suffers from to include:

1.  A lack of positive CS role models in the media.

From figure [femSTEMgrad], we can see that in the 1980s, more than 30%
of all graduating university CS majors were women. By 2010, that number
was less than 20%. Even with all the misconceptions around math being a
strong indicator towards computer science aptitude, it is even more
troubling to realize that top mathematics SAT scorers were still not
picking CS as their major (Kinnunen and Malmi, 2006); see
figure [Top 10 Average SAT Mathematics Scores by Intended Major]({{ site.url }}/images/hiphopathy/TopSATMathIntendedMajor2013_NCWIT_SecondaryEd.jpg).

![Female Percentage of Select STEM Undergraduate Degree Recipients]({{ site.url }}/images/hiphopathy/percentwomencs.jpg)

![Top 10 Average SAT Mathematics Scores by Intended Major]({{ site.url }}/images/hiphopathy/TopSATMathIntendedMajor2013_NCWIT_SecondaryEd.jpg)

This issue of underrepresentation in computer science is not only
pertinent to computer science education, but is also of direct
importance to the health of the national economy. According to data from
the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, for every 150,000 computing jobs
available, as a nation, we produce roughly 55,000 computing graduates to
fill those jobs (BLS, 2012). Furthermore, the bureau has
projections which show that 51% of the 9.2 million STEM (Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) jobs between the years 2010 to
2020 will be in computing. Since 70%—women, ethnic-minorities and
persons with disabilities—of the population is underrepresented in
computing, this makes the issue of maximizing participation in computer
science education a national issue.

Figure [popuGenderRace]({{ site.url }}/images/hiphopathy/chart_3.png) shows the ethnic breakdown of the population
along gender lines. From figure [popuCSUndergrad]({{ site.url }}/images/hiphopathy/chart_1.png), we can see that as of
2010, less than 20% of computer science degrees are obtained by women,
to achieve parity this should be 50%. Similarly, less than 20% of
computer science degrees are obtained by underrepresented minorities, to
achieve parity this should be 28%. It is interesting to note the fact
that underrepresented minority men are almost at parity in the conferral
of undergraduate CS degrees as of 2010.

Based on recent civil rights agitation in addressing this racial and
gender gap in technology, some of the major technology companies have
moved to transparency as the first step towards righting this balance.
While 20% of all CS degrees are obtained by women, in the workforce of
the major tech companies, their numbers are not commensurate. Using
Google Inc., as an example—one of the elite technology companies in
Silicon valley—at the time of this writing, it had its female technical
workforce representation at 18%, while its ethnic-minority technical
workforce was at 3% (Google, 2015). At the time of this writing, most
of the other technology companies have a similar demographic
distribution with regards to race and gender.

To bring this issue home, particularly with respect with Google, Inc. In
2010, they conducted a survey on a sample of their US based employees
[ACM:2012]. They found the following results:

-   Nearly all CS majors (98%) reported being exposed to CS prior to
    college, compared to less than half of non-CS majors (45%). The
    nature of the exposure varied from reading about CS, after-school
    programs or camps, to middle or high school CS classes.

-   Those who went on to major in CS were more likely than non-majors to
    have had a CS class offered in their high school.

-   CS majors were more likely to have known that CS was a possible
    career path when they were in high school.

What makes these finding even more difficult to swallow in light of the
numbers, is that according to the ACM Education Policy Committee[^2]:

> “Computing jobs are among the fastest growing areas of employment in
> the United States …These occupations pay extremely well, providing
> opportunities for U.S. workers to embark on dynamic careers, enjoy a
> good standard of living, and contribute to the innovation that drives
> the country’s economic growth.”

Furthermore, computing jobs can create an attainable entrée into the
middle class for many Americans, particularly ethnic-minority persons
who face disproportionate challenges with regards to economic upward
mobility.

![United States Census by Gender and Race, 2010]({{ site.url }}/images/hiphopathy/chart_3.png)

![Undergraduate CS Degree Earned, 1991-2010]({{ site.url }}/images/hiphopathy/chart_1.png)

The issue of maximizing participation in a field is not something new.
The law profession was wrestling with the same challenges that CS is
presently facing in the 1970s. There were also similar calls for law to
up their diversity efforts. As early as 1963, a mere 4% of all law
students were women. By 2012, law school enrollments, along gender, had
reached parity. With regards to ethnic-minorities, in the 1980s, they
constituted 8% of law students, but by 2012, ethnic-minority students
constituted 24% of the graduates (Harper, 2012). Certainly if a field
like law—who like computer science is not available at the high school
level—can overcome these hurdles, then surely we can do the same.

Proposed Solution
-----------------

As a means to address the low numbers of computer science instruction at
the high school level as well as the under-production of computer
science degrees at the collegiate level, a new AP CS Principles course
has been developed to broaden participation in computing. Instead of
focusing mostly on programming and algorithms, this new curriculum

> “introduces students to the central ideas of computing and computer
> science, to instill ideas and practices of computational thinking, and
> to have students engage in activities that show how computing and
> computer science change the world.” (College Board, 2015)

![Ethnicity Distribution of Undergraduates at UC Berkeley, Fall
2014]({{ site.url }}/images/hiphopathy/GenderEthnicityUCBerkeley.png)

UC Berkeley has been chosen as one of the pilot sites for this course
(Astrachan et al., 2011). The course with the title “Beauty
and Joy of Computing (BJC),” is implemented in UC Berkeley’s CS10
series—a CS course designed for non-majors.

Inspecting the demographics of the university, as can be seen in figure
[demographicsUCB]({{ site.url }}/images/hiphopathy/GenderEthnicityUCBerkeley.png), we see that the student population is mostly White
and Asian; as a result, this location is limited in its ability to serve
as a testing ground in assessing the efficacy of the new AP CS
Principles curriculum in attracting ethnic-minority students. However,
the university provides an excellent environment where we can
investigate the impact of the BJC curriculum on female students.

CS10, uses uses a visually rich programming environment called Snap*!*.
Snap*!* is a Turing complete extension of MIT Media Lab’s Scratch
(Resnick et al., 2009), developed to accommodate first-class procedures and
first-class lists. In the Snap*!* environment, students’ build their
scripts by clicking together lego like block structures.

Snap*!* has several pedagogical benefits, including eliminating the
notoriously frustrating experience of learning the syntax of most
text-based programming environments. Snap*!* also has a feature that
renders it unable to create syntax errors, adhering to the low-floor,
high-ceiling model of pedagogically sound introduction to CS learning
tools  (Grover and Pea, 2013).

Theoretical Rationale
---------------------

The rationale for carrying out this research is two fold. First, I seek
to research the impact of CS10 on the computer science experiences of
underrepresented students (mostly female) at UC Berkeley.

CS10 was specifically designed for non-majors to broaden participation.
Since its inception, the course has been phenomenally successful in
attracting female students, with the spring 2013 offering breaking the
50% female barrier[^3]. One of the goals of this work is to see if CS10
is able to serve as a successful gateway into the major, and more
importantly, if a significant portion of the female students feel a
strong sense of CS belonging.

Assuming the findings are positive, the second reason for undertaking
this study is to address the impedance match between the performance of
CS10 students in CS61A. The working hypothesis is that students who have
previously taken CS10 have a challenging time transitioning to CS61A
because they do not realize that they already have the most essential
thing necessary to succeed in the class, computational thinking.

Additionally, students are struggling with learning to program in
Python, the programming language in which computation is realized in
CS61A. From anecdotal feedback, we have observed students getting bogged
down with understanding syntax. Because CS10 students have heretofore
been programming in a syntax free environment—Snap*!*—they spend more
cognitive resources mediating between what they already know, which is
solving problems with a computational approach realized in a visual
language, and trying to map this new syntax driven text-based language
unto that.

Where as, their counterparts who have not had a previous programming
experience before CS61A seem to be doing better in the class, than the
students who have had prior programming exposure in a visual blocks
based environment; which poses a conundrum. Many of us in the academic
community work off the assumption that prior programming experience is
beneficial to success in student performance in the first class designed
for majors. What we have experienced at UC Berkeley does not support
this hypothesis, and we would like to investigate why this is so.

Based on the working hypothesis that it is the transition from Snap*!*
to Python that is responsible for the impedance match, a new curricular
unit called “Besides Blocks” has been designed. Besides Block is a
curricular unit that transitions students from Snap*!* to Python by
situating the two languages within a higher computational thinking
context. The pinnacle of the Besides Blocks unit is the Python data
unit.

Theoretical Framework
---------------------

This work draws from the cognitive perspective on learning, emphasizing
the understanding of concepts, reasoning, and how that influences
problem solving [Greeno, 1996], with particular emphasis on
constructionism [Papert, 1980]. A lot of the ideas for this research are
motivated by the ideas that Seymour Papert touted in his seminal book
*Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and Powerful Ideas*. What Papert did
in the 1980s with the creation of the LOGO programming environment was
to demonstrate how children’s computational thinking skills can be
harnessed through the use of a computational object to think with, in
his case the LOGO turtle.

With LOGO, children could create figures on a screen by entering a few
basic commands to the computer. These commands took the form of
naturally occurring english words like “forward,” accompanied with a
number that determined how many steps the artificial turtle of the LOGO
environment would move. Through these commands, children were able to
learn programming, but more importantly, they gained an intuitive
understanding of geometry.

The keywords in the LOGO programming language were words that children
were already familiar with. This act gave each student a non-threatening
way to engage with programming; thereby, creating a low barrier to entry
for introductory computer science. The Snap*!* programming language is
an intellectual design descendant of LOGO via Scratch.

Scratch was designed specifically to improve on the aspects of LOGO that
researchers believed led to its eventual decline in education. In order
to realize Papert’s dream of computational fluency for all, researchers
at the MIT Media lab extended the LOGO programming language to make it
more “tinkerable,” i.e., moving from text to graphical blocks, more
meaningful, allowing for a diversity of projects, and more social
allowing the sharing ones work as part of a community [Resnick, 2012].
At the time the first version of Scratch was created, it was not Turing
complete [^4]. This led the developer Jens Mönig to create a Turing
complete version of Scratch initially called BYOB for Build Your Own
Blocks, which was later changed to Snap*!*.

![Tracing LOGO to Snap!]({{ site.url }}/images/hiphopathy/Logo_Scratch_Snap!.png)

The aspects of Papert’s work that is most influential in this research
is the idea that knowledge is built upon already existing ideas and
schema that students have. Stating that the way we learn is either by
building upon our pre-existing theories, or creating new concepts, and
then integrating them into our broader theories. Additionally, Papert
hit on an idea that I believe is essential to the creation of *all* good
curriculum. The idea that education should have cultural resonance. In
his book, *Mindstorms*, Papert lays out how his love for gears was a
great entry point and an intuitive cultural tool that he could use to
understand formal systems.

> “In the Foreword of this book I described how gears helped
> mathematical ideas to enter my life. Several qualities contributed to
> their effectiveness. First they were a part of my natural
> landscape,embedded in the culture around me. …Second, gears were part
> of the world of adults around me and through them I could relate to
> these people. Third, I could use my body to think about the gears.
> …And finally, because, in a very real sense, the relationship between
> gears contains a great deal of mathematical information, I could use
> gears to think about formal systems”.[Papert,1980, pp. 11]

These ideas that Papert lays down in this excerpt from his book should
be understood as the foundational articles upon which every culturally
relevant pedagogical work should be built. Appropriating the turtle in
the LOGO programming environment, gave children a way to think about the
principles of computation and the practice of programming.

This research integrates both the cognitive and socio-cultural views of
learning. Often in academic research, cognitively oriented studies in
learning are not brought to bear with socio-cultural studies in
understanding cognition (Sperber and Hirschfeld, 1999). This is especially
detrimental when we are studying learning and cognition within groups
whose culture varies from the norm[^5]. Because some of the research
questions of this work is interested in understanding the role that
cultures plays in cognition, it synthesizes scholarly research in both
the cognitive and socio-cultural traditions.

### Socio-Cultural Perspective {#socioCulturalPerspective}

There is a wide body of scholarly research, both empirical and
theoretical, highlighting the educational challenges of ethnic-minority
students. However, most of the research is often presented through a
deficit framework (Lee, 2008). Some scholars are beginning to
recognize that students of color community and culture are often
devalued by the public education system. The response has been some
research that looks at how we can draw upon cultural resources to
improve classroom instruction, e.g., “funds of knowledge”
(Moll et al., 1992) and cultural modeling (Lee, 1995).
There has actually been an extensive tradition of culturally responsive
pedagogy in mathematics education, for example the work of Tara Yosso,
using the community, cultural wealth approach which has been developed
in response to the deficit model of ethnic-minority students education
in the United States (Yosso, 2005).

In the CS context, computational thinking presents a tantalizing
opportunity for culturally responsive pedagogy. Because of its recent
ascendancy, there is very little research both empirical and theoretical
on how culturally responsive pedagogy that supports computational
thinking can be done. It is of interest to note that similar work is
been done in Computer Science with the emergence of the ethno-computing
field (Eglash et al., 2006; Eglash et al., 2013; Magerko et al., 2013). Emerging scholars are starting to engage scholarship in the process of
how we draw upon communities’ cultural resources, within CS.

Unfortunately, when one encounters the words “**culture**,” or
“**socio-cultural**,” it triggers that part of our mind that associates
with ethnic-minorities. The word *culture* in this context often
foreshadows “othering.” But culture encompasses all. It remains a
challenge to bring about good culturally responsive teaching in
multi-cultural environments, especially in a place like UC Berkeley.

Research Context
----------------

As a computer scientist who exist squarely at the intersection of
underrepresentation in the field, i.e., gender and ethnicity, issues of
inclusion were starting to become harder and harder for me to ignore. It
was for this reason why I decided to head back to graduate school and
investigate why students who looked like me were not fully represented
in computer science. I was fortunate enough to have decided to
investigate this issue at the same time it was getting addressed by
society writ large.

In the last few years since I have started this line of inquiry, I have
been fortunate enough to have ample exposure to various learning
environments where I could observe and see how students experienced
computer science education both in school and after school settings.
Spring 2011, I had the opportunity to teach middle school and high
school girls *Introduction to App Development* through Iridescent
Learning’s Technovation challenge; an after school program designed to
introduce girls to new product development in 8 weeks, with the support
of female industry professionals. This gave me hands on experience in
broadening participation.

The Technovation challenge used a drag-and-drop programming environment
*AppInventor[^6]*, designed by Hal Abelson—author of *Structure and
Interpretation of Computer Programs*; the definitive textbook that has
been used by most leading institutions and is considered one of the best
attempts ever put down in text at understanding computation.

As great as the program was, and as easy as AppInventor was to use, it
came up quickly against a tough ceiling. The apps that were created were
simple prototypes that needed to be re-engineered in Java to be of real
use. So once again, there was a need to go from a drag-and-drop
environment to a text-based environment. It seemed that once the
interest for computer science was ignited in the student, we as the
computer science education community still needed to create something
that will continue to fan those flames and not let them die out in the
wilderness that the AP CS Java class had become.

While my exposure to Technovation cheered me on to believe we could turn
the ship around, it left me posing this question, would the program had
been just as successful in igniting the curiosity for computer science
if it had been unisex? Furthermore, as an educator and parent, I felt
uneasy with the unsaid notion that *boys* were the problem. That it was
the boys in introductory computer science classes that were responsible
for chasing the girls away.

This realization led me to accept an opportunity to design and teach a
unisex middle school computer science summer program at Stanford
University. While I did witness some of the stereotypical “bad boys”
behavior, I realized something deeper still. I realized that every time
we create an all-girls program as our attempt to design a “safe learning
environment” for girls, we rob boys of the opportunity to socialize well
with girls in the computer science classroom. And more importantly to
correct deleterious behavior that stem from gendered notions of computer
science belonging. This experience made me realize single-sex
environments might not be the panacea that we had hoped for, and
furthermore, single-sex environments were just a way of postponing the
inevitable.

[EPGY] In the Stanford middle school computer science summer program, I
experimented with building transitional curriculum designed to help
students transition from a graphical programming language to a
text-based programming language. These and other experiences are what
led me to conducting a formal analysis on the effectiveness of CS10 in
attracting historically underrepresented students in computer science.

Research Framing
----------------

The central question that drives my research is, what are the
socio-curricular factors that lead historical underrepresented students
to choose computer science? Is there something about computer science
culture that makes it difficult for students who are not White or Asian
males to choose this field? Like most scholars in the field, I started
my investigative thinking around this issue by focusing on the missing
parties, the women and men who are not represented. But as I continued
on my investigative journey, towards the end of my investigation, I
realized that I had been thinking about the issue wrong. I had
inadvertently adopted a deficit framework, instead of being agnostic in
my approach, investigating both the represented and the
underrepresented.

The work that is presented in this research stems from these lines of
inquiry and leads to unexpected conclusions that make computer science
as a field, as well as its culture all the more endearing. For it is its
strong tight knit cultural valence that is also its greatest weakness
and its largest opportunity.


[^1]: Science, Engineering and Technology (SET)

[^2]: http://www.acm.org/public-policy/education-policy-committee

[^3]: It is important to note, that this is the first Computer Science
    course, since UC Berkeley has been tracking student course data,
    that has ever achieved that feat.

[^4]: Turing Completeness relates to the ability of a programming
    language to have first order procedures and data structures.

[^5]: The current norm in CS is White and Asian male.

[^6]: AppInventor is based on Android mobile operating system designed
    by Google. AppInventor provides a graphical interface to abstract
    away Java and XML that Android uses

Bibliography
----------------

The bibliography can be found [here]({{ site.url }}/images/hiphopathy/Hiphopathy_Intro_Citation.pdf)

